
Internal fragmentation :
. too much free memory in an address space.

Segmentation :
. segments of the same address space can be populated in different places across physical memory
. this should allow the kernel populate processes that do not hold memory hostage between the stack and the heap
. MMU should have a register pair for every segment
. segmentation is fast because address translation is simple 

Segment : a piece of uninterrupted virtual address space.
. logical address space segment 
. every segment has its own base and bounds pair
. virtual address - 14 bits (2 bits to tell the segment , 12 bits of offset) 
  . code segment
    . seg field : 00
    . grows positive : 1
    . data segment and code segment are usually lumped together as "program code" 
  . heap segment
    . seg field : 01 
    . grows positive : 1
  . stack segment
    . seg field : 11 
    . grows positive : 0
  . offset - virtual location within the context of the segment 

Offset :
. relative location within the segment
. offset is positive for the code and the heap (growing positively, i.e. towards f..f ) 
. offset is negative for the stack since it grows negatively (towards 0) 
. 11 0100 0000 0000 (11 - segment (stack) ; offset is 1K )
  . this is a stack segment, stacks grow negatively => offset is negative
  . neg.offset = -1K
  . phys.addr = base + offset = 27K
  . bounds check is performed : | -1K | < max.seg.size (4K) 

Segmentation fault :
. attempting to access memory outside of the bounds of a segment  

External fragmentation :
. too many tiny free pockets across RAM as a result of spreading out and not compacting segments
. it gets more diffucult to place new segments or grow the already existing ones
  . Remember : processes can request specific large amounts of memory and not get a fit
  . the kernel will have to deny the request

Compaction :
. the kernel stops all processes and presses them together in the physical memory (updating their base and bounds)
. greatly taxes the memory and the CPU performance in the process
. because segments are compacted, the odds them being able to grow are small
. heap compaction : once a chunk of the process' heap is allocated it cannot be moved 

.
