
 . c. 1970 : information disclosure 
   . "... exploring the capabilities of networked computing, without the security measures
      that are commonplace today. This experimental environment led to instances of unintentional
      information disclosure.

      One notable example involves misconfigured file permissions on network-accessible servers.
      Researchers and system administrators might have inadvertently set file permissions in a way
      that allowed unauthorized users to access sensitive data. This could include research findings,
      system configurations, or other information that was meant to be restricted."



 . 1971 : privilege escalation 
   . "Password File"
   . attack on the UNIX operating system
   . "attackers exploited a vulnerability in the system's password file to gain elevated access privileges"



 . 1974 : DoS (denial of service)
   . "Christmas Attack" - heavy traffic sent to ARPANET 
   . crashed the network's IMPs (Interface Message Processors)



 . 1985 : authentication bypass
   . by "Len de Bruxelles" 
   . "vulnerabilities in the Unix rsh (remote shell) service"
   . "to gain unauthorized access without providing valid credentials"



 . 1988 : buffer overflow attack / code injection 
   . Morris Worm
   . "a programming error"
   . by Robert Tappan Morris - "the first person to be convicted under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act" 
   . released on November 2, 1988 
   . fingerd buffer overflow exploit
     = feeding an excessively long input to a program for buffering 
     + using primitive C functions
     => string-buffer overflow
     => overwriting the memory that follows (BP , ret)
     => overwritten ret can lead to somewhere in the middle of the NOP-sled
     -> NOP-sled leads to the entry point of malicious code 
   . sendmail debug-mode exploit
   . "weak password guessing" 
   . "unintentional recursion (rapid replication of the worm) that caused the worm to replicate more aggressively than intended"
   . "... his intention was not to cause harm, but rather to gauge the size of the internet"
   



 . 1988 : session hijacking
   . the "Session Hijacking Demonstration" tool by hacker Craig Neidorf
   . "illustrating the exploitation of insecure connections to intercept and take over user sessions" 



 . 2001 : cross-site request forgery (CSRF)
   . by RSnake
   . "a malicious website coerced a user's browser to make unauthorized requests to another site
      where the user was authenticated" 

_
