I realize there are countless questions on Quora by now that are similar to this one, though my situation is very specific.

I want to start a career in hardware design with the end goal of making a six-figure income as an ISA CPU designer or architect, though I have very little idea of how to get started. My intuition is that it's going to take years of work and experience to get there and I am not 100% sure if it's even going to be attainable in the first place given my background.

As a 33-year-old, I've spent most of my adult life in sales and warehouses. I thought I'd become some kind of a game developer, so I got my B.S. in Computer Science and Engineering 10 years ago. My academic experience at UNR (University of Nevada-Reno) left an awful lot to be desired and I got really frustrated with formal academia and the video game industry after hearing crunch horror stories and realizing how under-prepared I got to be for the industry. Those university credits are old now and at this time I am much more interested in how computers work, specifically how the CPU talks to other parts of the computer, especially the peripherals.

I got a copy of the book on studying for the two CompTIA A+ certification exams and am planning on getting a book on studying for the IPC-A-610 certification exam (though $350 sounds rather insane; never mind the cost of the certification courses and exams). But the two big problems are still there - the financial situation and lack of ideas for effective time management when it comes to going back to school. 

Speaking of schooling: from my lengthy cruising on the web I got the impression that I should definitely get an EE or an ME degree, albeit I got input from several staff members at CU Boulder that I should get on the M.S. track in CSE and take every action to "refresh" everything that I (should have) learned from all the courses of the past, especially all the ones that I got a C(+) in - Data Structures, Automata Theory and Formal Languages, Computer Communications and Networks, and Analysis of Algorithms. But I'm no longer interested in CS. Never mind that 10 years ago I was not taught how to write C code or use a debugger; and now at UNR they still do not teach C but they expect you to know how to use a debugger.

My current plan is to find work in (PCB) manufacturing/assembly, sink the credit card debt, start saving big time, move through different roles in the manufacturing/assembly industry or IT/PC industry, maybe get a couple of certifications, go to an affordable school - probably a community college to save money, - transfer my credits to a more respectable institution (not UNR), and get a serious internship opportunity with God knows whom - Intel, AMD, Qualcomm - who knows.

From further reading on the web I was let in on one little secret: career development in tech is not a straight line. That being said, I welcome any strong suggestions you may have for me. Am I overthinking anything here or have I forgot something?


